\chapter{Wybe programming Language}


\begin{figure}
\centering
\begin{tabular}{r c l}

\( func\ factorial(n:int):int \) & \(\rightarrow \) & 
\( proc\ factorial(n:wybe.int, ?\verb+$+:wybe.int) \) \\
\( ?c = bar(a, b) \) & \(\rightarrow\) & \( bar(a, b, ?c) \) \\
\( ?y = f(g(x)) \) & \(\rightarrow\) & \( g(x, ?temp)\ f(temp, ?y) \) \\


\end{tabular}
\\
\caption{Normalisation of Wybe functions to Procedures.}
\label{fig:wybe_convert_to_proc}
\end{figure}



Wybe is a new programming language that exhibits both declarative and
imperative features. It aims to include the good parts of both and still be
simple to learn. Features of Wybe include enforcement of interface integrity,
statically typed, and LP like procedures. Interface integrity involves
depicting all the inputs and outputs, along with side-effects in the function
or procedure prototype. This makes studying the effects of a function quite
easy and apparent just through its prototype. A Wybe procedure will pass
modifiable resources in and out just like normal parameters. Wybe syntax is
still undergoing modifications every now and then, with new features also being
added. 

A Wybe module is equivalent to a wybe source file. The module name is same as
the source file without the extension. The module's interface consists of the
public functions and procedures in the module. There is also a separate syntax
to declare sub-modules inside the full file module. Sub-module names are
qualified with the outer modules' name. For example a module \textit{A.B.C} is
the sub-module of \textit{A.B}, which is a sub-module of \textit{A}, which is
the module of the source file \textit{A.wybe}. Defining new types also creates
a new sub-module. 





\section{Compilation of Wybe}

The Wybe source code is converted to the LPVM IR. In this process it undergoes
flattening, type checking, un-branching, and a final clause generation pass to
obtain a structure similar to Figure~\ref{fig:lpvm_data_type}. Variables in
Wybe can be adorned to explicitly define their direction of information flow. A
variable can flow in (x), flow out (?x), or both ways (!x). The Wybe procedure
structure is quite similar to LPVM procedures, making LPVM a good fit for this
language. Everything is modelled as a procedure quite early in the compiler
pipeline. Alongside procedures, functions do exist. Although they are
normalised to look like a procedure definition along with the flattening step
by the compiler. The output of the function is simply added as a output
parameter in its procedure form. Expressions are dealt with in a similar way.
Some common conversions are shown in Figure~\ref{fig:wybe_convert_to_proc}.

Since LPVM primitives are just procedure calls, all Wybe statements are
gradually reduced to procedure calls too. These primitive procedure calls can
be calls to other procedures in the module or imported modules (fully qualified
procedure names), or be foreign calls. The foreign calls are used to indicate
linking of a foreign object file and its code, for example, the standard
library makes foreign calls to C, to access system IO. Even though these are
standard procedure calls to LPVM, it will later become an extern call in LLVM
to a shared object file. The only difference between a local and a foreign
procedure call is that the local calls can be in-lined. Otherwise it is just
another \textit{Prim} in a clause body.

Wybe procedures can be polymorphic. Multiple Wybe procedures can have the same
name but with different paramter types and modes. This enables procedures with
multiple modes, similar to Prolog. For example, a procedure to add two numbers
can have the following definitions: \textit{add(x, y, ?z)}, \textit{add(x, ?y,
  z)}, \textit{add(?x, y, z)}. The call \textit{add(3, ?t, 5)} will evaluate
\textit{t} to be \textit{2}. This selection is done in the Type checking pass,
which matches calls to the definition with the correct types and modes. 

The un-branching pass is when LPVM replaces the remaining conditionals and
loops with recursion, as shown in the last chapter. 


